# :zap: Security

- No security fixes since previous release
- Oldest release with no known security issues: `v3.00.00` (first public version)

# :bulb: Highlights

Main changes from the previous version are:
- Debian "Stretch" 9 is no longer officially supported, as this version has been EOL upstream for a few months now. This doesn't mean that the future versions of The Bastion won't work under this distro, it means that this distro release is no longer part of the automated tests. As Debian Stretch is EOL, you should consider upgrading to a more recent version, as maintaining a secured underlying OS is paramount to the whole security of The Bastion (or of any other software).

- Debian "Bookworm" 12 has been part of the automated tests for a while, but is now officially supported as this has been officially released upstream.

- Two new configuration parameters have been added to the [selfAddPersonalAccess](https://ovh.github.io/the-bastion/plugins/restricted/selfAddPersonalAccess.html#options) and [accountAddPersonalAccess](https://ovh.github.io/the-bastion/plugins/restricted/accountAddPersonalAccess.html#options) commands.

Side note: tagged releases are now signed. This was a prerequisite to the upcoming integrated and secure `adminUpgrade` command.

A more complete list of changes can be found below, for an exhaustive (and boring) list, please refer to the commit log.

# :pushpin: Changes
- feat: add 2 configurable knobs to ``(self|account)AddPersonalAccess``
- feat: plugins: add loadConfig parameter & config validator support
- chg: drop support for Debian 9, add support for Debian 12
- fix: ``accountList``: crash in some cases
- fix: add missing autocompletions, readonly flags and help category for some plugins
- chore: fix GitHub actions under FreeBSD

# :fast_forward: Upgrading

- [General upgrade instructions](https://ovh.github.io/the-bastion/installation/upgrading.html)
- [Specific upgrade instructions for v3.12.00](https://ovh.github.io/the-bastion/installation/upgrading.html#v3-12-00-2023-06-27)
